Data has something to say about  flight  disruptions
Analysis of flight delays & cancellations from U.S. official records.
Photo by Skyler Smith on Unsplash. Aircraft preparing to depart, in a not-so-inviting weather.Finally, the day has come! You have been waiting for months, yearning to see your favorite band live. It will surely be a night to remember. That five hour flight will definitely worth it. Excited, you enter the airport. But suddenly, as you stare at the screen, your illusions crumble. Right after your flight number you see the dreaded word: Cancelled.
This is a fictional, but not so uncommon story. Anyone who has ever done even a modest amount of traveling has been affected by a delayed or cancelled flight.
Disrupted flights are not only annoying, but can also have nasty consequences for travelers and the economy.
Here we will analyze data about domestic flights operated by large airlines in the U.S. throughout 2008, in an attempt to better understand flight disruptions.
The data  was published by the U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics, but for our purposes we will use the version available at Kaggle.
Airlines Delay
Airline on-time statistics and delay causeswww.kaggle.com
Hopefully, the knowledge we gain will help us make better informed choices in our future travels and even think about some strategies to reduce flight disruptions.
But really, how common are flight disruptions?
According to the data, it depends on how tolerant you are to delays. 
Of the 1,936,555 flights recorded, only 0.42% of them did not arrive at the intended destination. Of those 8,187 unfortunate flights, 0.03% were cancelled and 0.39% were diverted to another destination.
Delays however, were a different story. Of the 1,928,368 flights that reached their destination, 55.3% had an arrival delay of 20 minutes or more and 22.77% got a their destination at least an hour late. 
Regarding disruptions, what are the best and worst carriers?
It actually depends on the kind of disruption we are talking about. The data suggests that the average delay discriminated by carrier (airline) varies considerably. 
Mean delay in departures and arrivals, discriminated by carrierThe best carrier regarding delays was Aloha Air (AQ), with an average departure delay of 26 minutes and an average arrival delay of 21 minutes. The second best was Frontier Airlines (F9), with an average delay of 27 minutes for departures and arrivals.
The carriers with the longest average delay in the year reported were Jet Blue (B6) and Mesa Airlines (YV), both with an average departure and arrival delay of 55 minutes. As shown in the plot above, other carriers follow closely.
This means that Aloha Air had almost  half the average delay than JetBlue and Mesa Airlines. A difference of 23 minutes.
Concerning cancelled and diverted flights, the differences are much more evident. 
The carrier that got the highest percentage of its flights diverted was Aloha Air (AQ), with 0.8%. In contrast, ExpressJet (EV) had just 0.11% of its flights diverted. 
Fortunately, flight cancellation percentages were pretty low for all carriers. Endeavor Air (9E) cancelled just 0.11% of its flights and was the carrier with the highest cancellation percentage. Aloha Air (AQ) and Southwest Airlines (WN) had a perfect score of 0.00% flights cancelled.
Percentage of flights that got cancelled or diverted to a destination different of the original, discriminated by carrierDo flight disruptions vary throughout the year?
As far as the data is concerned, not very much. 
The month with the lowest average delay was October, with 40 minutes for departures and 37 minutes for arrivals. 
As we may have expected, December had the highest average delays, with 49 minutes for both, departures and arrivals. 
Compared with October, December had an increase of 32.4% in the average arrival delay and 22.5% in the average departure delay. However, considering that this represents an increase of just 12 and 9 minutes respectively, we could say that the difference is not quite significant.
Average delays for the rest of the months, are distributed rather uniformly in between these minimum and maximum values.
Mean delay in departures and arrivals, discriminated by monthThe percentages of cancelled and diverted flights varied considerably when discriminated by month, as shown in the plot below. 
December got 0.24% of its flights cancelled and 0.69% of them diverted. Again, it was the month with the highest flight disruption.
September was the month with the lowest percentage of diverted flights, 0.2% and had no cancelled flights at all.
Actually, we observed cancelled flights only in October, November and December. Diverted flights were not so evenly distributed among months as delays did.
The increase in the percentage of diverted flights from September to December  was a very significant 245%. Even more, the percentage of cancelled flights went from 0% to 69% in between these months.
Percentage of flights cancelled and diverted to a destination different from the original, discriminated by monthWhat are the most significant delay causes?
The data also provides information about how much of the delays are due to the following causes:
NAS Delay: factors within the control of the National Airspace System. E.g. non-extreme weather conditions, airport operations, heavy traffic volume and air traffic control.
Late Aircraft Delay: caused by the late arrival of the aircraft at a previous airport.
Carrier Delay: circumstances within the airline's control. E.g. maintenance or crew problems, aircraft cleaning, baggage loading and fueling.
Weather Delay: significant meteorological conditions actual or forecasted.
Security Delay: situations in the airport or the aircraft caused by a security breach.

First we computed how much of the total arrival delay for all flights, was attributed to each type of delay:
Late Aircraft: 40%
Carrier: 30.0%
N.A.S: 23.7%
Weather: 5.8%
Security: 0.1%
We can clearly see that in general, arrival delays are mostly caused by the aircraft getting late to the airport and by issues with carrier.
We also evaluated the correlation between the departure and arrival delays of each flight versus the causes described above. 
The results confirms that both, departure and arrival delays are mostly related to the carrier and to previous segments of the flight.
Conclusions
Thankfully, getting your flight cancelled or diverted looks pretty unlikely.
When planning your connections, make sure you have at least 2 hours to reach your next flight. Almost one fourth of your flights may get a delay of an hour or more.
If possible try not to fly in December, when delays tend to increase and flight disruptions may be more frequent.
Prefer flights having as few segments as possible. As the data told us, delays are mostly caused by the aircraft arriving late at the airport, due to delays accumulated on previous segments.
Situations related to the carrier are another major cause of delays. They should examine their processes and hopefully improve their service.